Now before we actually start to work with any HTML elements, let's have a look at that document
and that window object.
Now for that, attached you find a very basic starting project, essentially an empty HTML file and an
empty app.js file which is imported into that HTML file here
and if you open up that HTML file and you open up your browser developer tools and go to the console
there which allows you to also run some Javascript commands as you learned, then here you can simply
write document
and this gives you access to this document object.
Now by default, you'll see you get this strange representation which looks like HTML code here,
that's a little feature by the chrome dev tools,
this is actually a Javascript object but since it's tied to the loaded document, to that loaded HTML
code, it gives you this presentation where you can even select different parts if you hover over them
but to get a feeling or get a look into the real Javascript object, you can type console.dir document
and you can use console.dir in any cases where console.log gives you this strange output
in the dev tools
and now you get access to the real Javascript object with all the properties that are in there and you
see, there are a lot of properties in there.
Now most of them might never matter to you but for example, the body property here if you expose that
gives you access to entire new object which in the end reflects your document body and everything that's
attached to that
and this will also allow us to get access to all the HTML content rendered in there.
There are other properties which you can dive in, for example document element here is basically your
entire HTML content,
so the body gives you access to everything that was rendered in that body part age, HTML holds everything
that was rendered or set up for your entire HTML code which was rendered,
so that's also another important property.
We also have a couple of other important properties, head for example unsurprisingly gives you access
to everything that was rendered as part of this head,
so together they kind of make up that entire HTML code as well of course and so on.
So there are a bunch of interesting things in there and we'll work with a couple of them
but there also are a lot of them which you will never really need but of course feel free to browse
through all of that in that document here,
this in the end is one of this important topmost objects which are made available to you by the browser
to allow you to interact with your loaded HTML document.
Now let's clear the console and let's also output window here, so you can type window here and you get
access to the window object.
Now this is that real topmost object and this gives you access to all the core APIs that the browser
wants to expose to you
and for example here you also find alert, a function which we already used a couple of times in this
course to throw such an alert.
The important thing is that with window, you by default if in your Javascript code, if you're running,
if you're typing some code here, you by default have access to everything in window which is why you
can just type alert like this. Totally correct would be window.alert as you see because window is this
topmost global object which is exposed to you by the browser and there, you have the alert functionality
but actually browsers always parse your Javascript code such that window.. is automatically added
in front of some function if that function can't be found anywhere else,
so the browser always looks in the window object if you're calling or accessing something, which is why
alert works just as well as window.alert would work here,
so that's really great.
So that window object is a really important global object giving you access to all these browser APIs
like alert, a bunch of other things which we haven't worked with yet and which we'll see later and also
the documents here.
This is the document I just output a second ago,
it's part of that window as I mentioned now
but as I also just mentioned, if you enter something just like this, the browser automatically looks in
the window, which is why we could use console.dir in the dev tools and we could also use it here
because that will automatically look in window.document. So you could use window.document but you
don't need to, the same for the alert.
So that's document which we have in here, a couple of other nice features which we'll see throughout the course
here to store data in the browser and so on, a couple of events which are exclusive to the window though
which fire when certain things happen in the window and these on something events here
by the way are just alternatives to using add event listener, something I'll dive deeper in the events
module of this course where we learn all about events and how to work with them and so on.
So there are a bunch of interesting things, here for example with outer height and outer width,
you see that this gives you certain dimensions about the window in which your app is running, your script
is running and also always keep in mind that the window does not really give you access to the
real window but also just to the tab in which your script is running, so you won't be able to use window
to interact with a totally different web page loaded in a different tab
because that would be a huge security issue if you could start reading information from another tab
on your web page here,
that would not be something you would want to do because you could fetch important information from
other tabs.
So whilst it's called window, it really just means the currently loaded tab but also the dimensions of
the general window and so on,
that's how you can think of it. So that's window and that's document
and no worries, we'll work with more of these things throughout the course to also see how we can get the size
of the web page and so on.
For now it's just important to keep in mind that you have these two global objects or that document
actually is a part of the window but that you can access it with just document due to the way how window
works and that this will help us interact with the web page and with the loaded HTML code. And
with that,
let's dive deeper into that DOM thing and understand how the browser really translates the HTML code
to something and how we can then interact with that.